---
title: Term 2 Week 4 Junior Problems
excerpt: Junior Problems for Term 2 Week 4
layout: post
---
{% include header.html %}

# Problem 1
One hundred ants are dropped on a meter stick. Each ant is traveling either to the left or the right with constant speed 1 meter per minute. When two ants meet, they bounce off each other and reverse direction. When an ant reaches an end of the stick, it falls off.

At some point all the ants will have fallen off. The time at which this happens will depend on the initial configuration of the ants.

Question: over ALL possible initial configurations, what is the longest amount of time that you would need to wait to guarantee that the stick has no more ants?

<details>
<summary>Click to show solution</summary>
All you need to realise is that two ants bouncing off of each other is equivalent to two ants <em>passing</em> through each other, in the sense that the positions of the ants just swaps and stays the same! As such, the longest that you would need to wait is 1 minute.
</details>
<br>

# Problem 2

$$
\sin(1\degree) + \sin(2\degree) + \sin(3\degree) + \cdots + \sin(89\degree) + \sin(90\degree)
$$

<details>
<summary>Click to show solution</summary>
$\sin(0\degree) + \sin(90\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
$\sin(1\degree) + \sin(89\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
$\sin(2\degree) + \sin(88\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
$\sin(3\degree) + \sin(87\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
$\cdots$ <br>
$\sin(88\degree) + \sin(2\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
$\sin(89\degree) + \sin(1\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
$\sin(90\degree) + \sin(0\degree) = \sin(90\degree) = 1$ <br>
<br>
The only remaining one that doesn't fit into this pattern would be $\sin(45\degree) = \frac{1}{2}$ <br>
As such, the solution is $\frac{91}{2} = 45.5$
</details>
<br>

### Credits:
#### Problem 1: [This problem](https://math.hmc.edu/funfacts/ants-on-a-stick/) is from Math Fun Facts
#### Problem 2: This problem is from this year's Melbourne University Maths Challenge, Intermediate