---
title: Term 2 Week 5 Junior Problems
excerpt: Junior Problems for Term 2 Week 5
layout: post
---
{% include header.html %}

# Problem 1
Find a positive integer solution $(x,y,z,a,b)$ for which

$$\frac{1}{x}+ \frac{1}{y} + \frac{1}{z} + \frac{1}{a} + \frac{1}{b} = 1\;.$$

Is your answer the only solution? If so, show why.

Please avoid the trivial $x=y=z=a=b=5$. Try looking for a solution where $x \neq y \neq z \neq a \neq b$ or if not, look for one where one variable equals to another, but explain your reasoning.

<details>
<summary>Click to show solution</summary>
The perfect number $28=1+2+4+7+14$ provides a solution:

$$
\frac1{28}+\frac1{14}+\frac17+\frac14+\frac12=\frac{1+2+4+7+14}{28}=1\;.
$$

If they’ve been doing unit (or ‘Egyptian’) fractions, I’d expect some to see that since $\frac16+\frac13=\frac12$,

$$
\frac16+\frac16+\frac16+\frac16+\frac13=1
$$

is a solution, though not a much more interesting one than the trivial solution. The choice of letters might well suggest the solution

$$
\frac16+\frac16+\frac16+\frac14+\frac14\;.
$$

A little playing around would show that $\frac14+\frac15=\frac9{20}$, which differs from $\frac12$ by just $\frac1{20}$; that yields the solution

$$
\frac1{20}+\frac15+\frac14+\frac14+\frac14\;.
$$

If I were the teacher, I’d hope that some kids would realize that since the average of the fractions is $\frac15$, in any non-trivial solution at least one denominator must be less than $5$, and at least one must be greater than $5$. Say that $x\le y\le z\le a\le b$. Clearly $x\ge 2$, so let’s try $x=2$. Then we need to solve

$$
\frac1y+\frac1z+\frac1a+\frac1b=\frac12\;.
$$

Now $y\ge 3$. Suppose that $y=3$; then

$$
\frac1z+\frac1a+\frac1b=\frac16\;.
$$

Now $1,2,$ and $3$ all divide $36$, and $\frac16=\frac6{36}$, so we can write

$$
\frac1{36}+\frac1{18}+\frac1{12}=\frac{1+2+3}{36}=\frac6{36}=\frac16\;,
$$

and we get another ‘nice’ solution,

$$
\frac12+\frac13+\frac1{12}+\frac1{18}+\frac1{36}\;.
$$
</details>
<br>

# Problem 2

Suppose a standard $8\times8$ chessboard has two diagonally opposite corners removed, leaving $62$ squares. Is it possible to place $31$ dominoes of size $2\times1$ so as to cover all of these squares?

<details>
<summary>Click to show solution</summary>
The puzzle is impossible to complete. A domino placed on the chessboard will always cover one white square and one black square. Therefore, a collection of dominoes placed on the board will cover an equal numbers of squares of each color. If the two white corners are removed from the board then $30$ white squares and $32$ black squares remain to be covered by dominoes, so this is impossible. If the two black corners are removed instead, then $32$ white squares and $30$ black squares remain, so it is again impossible.
</details>
<br>

### Credits:
#### Problem 1: [This problem](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/290435/find-five-positive-integers-whose-reciprocals-sum-to-1) is from the Maths Stack Exchange
#### Problem 2: [This problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutilated_chessboard_problem) is from Wikipedia, titled the Mutilated chessboard problem